# capstoneGoogle1
Google Data Analyst Capstone - Option 1

INTRODUCTION
This capstone is part of the eighth and final course from the Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate, where you can complete an optional case study. In this project, we will apply the five steps of the data analysis process taught in the program: Ask, Prepare, Process, Analyze, Share, and Act. The project was done with Python, and it is posted on Kaggle. You can access it here or on GitHub to check it out.
ABOUT THE COMPANY
Bellabeat is a high-tech company that manufactures health-focused smart products. Founded in 2013 by artist Urška Sršen and mathematician Sando Mur, the company has many products carefully designed to monitor activity, stress, sleep, and reproductive data to help women better understand how their bodies work and make healthier choices. While small, Bellabeat has quickly positioned itself as a tech-driven wellness company for women. Chief Creative Officer, Urška Sršen, believes that analyzing smart device fitness data could help unlock new growth opportunities for the company.
BUSINESS TASK
Focus on one of Bellabeat's products and analyze smart device data to understand how consumers use non-Bellabeat smart devices.
PRODUCT
Bellabeat app: The Bellabeat app provides users health data related to their activity, sleep, stress, menstrual cycle, and mindfulness habits. This data can help users better understand their patterns and make healthy decisions. The Bellabeat app connects to their line of intelligent wellness products.
STAKEHOLDERS
•	Urška Sršen — Bellabeat's co-founder and Chief Creative Officer.
•	Sando Mur — Mathematician and Bellabeat's co-founder; a key member of the Bellabeat executive team.
•	Bellabeat marketing analytics team — A team of data analysts responsible for collecting, analyzing, and reporting data that helps guide Bellabeat's marketing strategy.
ASK
•	What are some trends in smart device usage?
•	How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
•	How could these trends help influence Bellabeat's marketing strategy?
PREPARE
Urška Sršen encourages the use of public data that explores smart device users' daily habits. Therefore, the dataset used in this project will be the Fitbit Fitness Tracker Data (CC0: Public Domain, dataset made available through Möbius).
About the data
According to its source, the dataset was generated by respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk and comprehended dates between 03–12–2016 and 05–12–2016. Thirty FitBit users consented to submit their personal tracker data, including a minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring. Variation between output represents using different Fitbit trackers and individual tracking behaviors/preferences.
This public dataset comprises 18 CSV files containing specific tracking information, such as daily calories, daily steps, etc. The data is organized in an extended format, where an Id column identifies each user, and the remaining columns contain different attributes about the user.
Regarding data bias, considering that the dataset only gathers information about 33 FitBit users over two months, it is essential to keep in mind that there is a real possibility that the data isn't a perfect representation of all FitBit users. However, we can still analyze the dataset and learn interesting information about the surveyed users and how they used their smart tracking devices over that period.
PROCESS
I began this phase by loading the libraries and datasets that would be used. Then, I explored data by getting an overview of the datasets, checking the data types, gathering a statistics summary, and cleaning the data.
ANALYZE
In the Analyze phase, I transformed data by creating a DayOfWeek column, changing data formatting, and merging datasets to perform analysis. I also aggregated and grouped data to do calculations and find key information, such as the average of total steps by day of the week, the average number of daily steps taken by the user, the most active time of day, etc. I divided the merged datasets into two parts: Activity Data and Sleep Data. In the Activity Data part, I analyzed the following variables:
The Average of Total Steps and Calories
How many steps do our users take daily? How many calories do they burn on average?
 
As we can see, the average total daily steps by the users are 7,638 steps. According to a study conducted in 2011 by BMC/BioMed Central, taking 10,000 steps a day is a reasonable target for healthy adults, helping reduce certain health conditions, such as high blood pressure and heart disease. To compare daily steps to an activity level, the following categories can be considered:
•	Inactive — Less than 5,000 steps/day
•	Average — Between 7,500 and 9,999 steps/day
•	Very Active — More than 12,500 steps/day
Given the information above, we can conclude that our users fall into the Average category. With this in mind, it becomes clear that users should improve their daily steps for optimal results regarding their health and well-being.
The Average of Total Steps by Day of the Week
Are the users consistent with the total steps taken throughout the week? Or are there significant changes as the days go by?
 
The Most Active Time of Day
What are the most active hours of the users' day on average? Are they occurring during the day or at night?
Time
0      42.188437
1      23.102894
2      17.110397
3       6.426581
4      12.699571
5      43.869099
6     178.508056
7     306.049409
8     427.544576
9     433.301826
10    481.665231
11    456.886731
12    548.642082
13    537.698154
14    540.513572
15    406.319126
16    496.845645
17    550.232892
18    599.169978
19    583.390728
20    353.905077
21    308.138122
22    237.987832
23    122.132890
Name: StepTotal, dtype: float64
I grouped the data by the StepTotal column and the Time column, extracting only the hours of the day from it.
The Time of Day Users Burn the Most Calories
When are the users burning the most calories? In the morning, afternoon, or night?
Time
0      71.805139
1      70.165059
2      69.186495
3      67.538049
4      68.261803
5      81.708155
6      86.996778
7      94.477981
8     103.337272
9     106.142857
10    110.460710
11    109.806904
12    117.197397
13    115.309446
14    115.732899
15    106.637158
16    113.327453
17    122.752759
18    123.492274
19    121.484547
20    102.357616
21     96.056354
22     88.265487
23     77.593577
Name: Calories, dtype: float64
I grouped the data by the Calories column and the Time column, extracting only the hours of the day from it.
Analyzing the Different Categories of Activity
How active are the users throughout the day? Do they spend much of their day very active or, perhaps, inactive enough?
 
Let's look closer at the average time spent on the different categories of active minutes. We can see that the amount of time the users spend being sedentary is quite significant. If we do the math, we learn that the users are Sedentary for, on average, 16.5 hours of their day. They spend about 3.2 hours of their day being Lightly Active, 23 minutes Fairly Active, and 35 minutes Very Active.
The Average of Minutes Spent in Each Activity Category
Let's analyze how our users are spending their day on average.
VeryActiveMinutes        21.265822
FairlyActiveMinutes      13.660436
LightlyActiveMinutes    194.197545
SedentaryMinutes        992.791446
dtype: float64
I analyzed some of the users' sleeping habits in the Sleep Data part.
The Average of Total Minutes Asleep and Total Time in Bed
 
According to the CDC, adults between 18 and 60 should get seven or more hours of sleep per night. By analyzing the TotalMinutesAsleep column, we learn that, on average, our users' sleeping time is 419.5 minutes (or 7 hours). We can, therefore, conclude that they have good sleeping habits.
The Average of Minutes Asleep by Day of the Week
We can group the data to find out how much sleep, on average, the users are getting throughout the week.
 
The Average Awake Time in Bed by Day of the Week
Now, let's look at how much time the users spend in bed without being asleep throughout the week.
 
If we take the mean from the AwakeTimeInBed, we learn that the users spent, on average, 39.5 minutes awake in bed.
SHARE
The Share phase is about visualizing the insights found in the Analyze phase. I started by plotting a scatter plot graph to identify the relationship between the total number of steps and the total number of burned calories.
Visualizing Total Steps and Calories
 
As we can see on the scatter plot above, there is a positive relationship between the two variables, which indicates that the greater the number of steps taken, the more calories the user burns. As mentioned above, keeping active is crucial for maintaining good health, and the number of steps the individual takes daily significantly impacts that.
Visualizing the Average of Total Steps by Day of the Week
 
This graph shows us the average total steps the users took throughout the week. We can see that the most active day in terms of steps taken is Saturday, followed by Tuesday. The least active day is Sunday —likely a rest day for the users. This visualization shows us that the users seem consistent with their total steps scores.
Visualizing the Most Active Time of Day
 
This chart tells us that users become more active between 6 and 8 am. The level of activity stays doesn't change dramatically throughout the day, but the peak hours seem to occur between 5 and 7 pm. Our users are likely choosing to work out after work/school hours.
Note that their activity levels start decreasing significantly at 8 pm and keep dropping as the hours' progress. The users seem to go to bed at a reasonable time, as lower activity levels are recorded at late night hours.
Visualizing the Time of Day Users Burn the Most Calories
We learned from a previous visualization that a positive correlation exists between the total amount of steps walked and burned calories. Let's see if the burned calories fluctuate as much as the activity levels.
 
According to the Sleep Foundation, we burn around 50 calories an hour while we sleep — and we can see that in the graph above. Observe that as the users wake up and start moving, the number of burned calories increases, peaking around the same time the users are most active during the day.
Visualizing the Average of Minutes Spent in Each Activity Category
We can visualize the distribution of time in percentages by plotting the following pie chart:
 
The Department of Health and Human Services recommends at least 30 minutes of moderate daily physical activity. It is also said that reducing sitting time is important to avoid one's risk of developing metabolic problems. We can conclude from our data that, even though our users are very active for over 30 minutes every day, they still spend an enormous amount of time being sedentary, which could result in future health issues.
Visualizing Total Minutes Asleep x Total Time in Bed
We can use a scatter plot to visualize the relationship between TotalMinutesAsleep and TotalTimeInBed better:
 
The scatter plot shows a strong positive linear association between the total number of minutes asleep and the total time spent in bed. This means most users are usually in bed only when sleeping and not much longer before or after that. However, we can still see that, at times, they spend a lot of time in bed without being asleep. This could relate to the weekends when many people sleep in or relax.
Visualizing the Average of Minutes Asleep by Day of the Week
 
The column chart above shows that the average Total Minutes of Asleep goes above the 400-minute mark — 419.8 minutes to be exact — with Sunday (7.6 hours) and Wednesday (7.2 hours) being the days where the users seem to have slept the most. It is clear from this visualization that there are no significant changes in sleeping time throughout the week. This information shows us that the users have a consistent sleeping schedule.
By analyzing the chart above, we can see that Sunday has the highest total Minutes Asleep average. If we go back to the "Average of Total Steps by Day of the Week" graph, we learn that Sunday also recorded the lowest number of the total steps average in the week, showing us that Sunday is likely the users' choice of a rest day.
Visualizing Awake Time in Bed by Day of the Week
 
As we can see, the users are consistent with their time in bed throughout the days of the week, and the same goes for the time they are awake in bed. From their total time in bed, they spend, on average, 39.5 minutes awake. The most extended recorded times they have occurred on the weekend, which is perfectly understandable.
ACT
Now, it is time to present the key findings and recommendations.
KEY FINDINGS
•	The average user takes 7,638 steps and burns 2,304 calories per day.
•	A positive relationship exists between the total number of steps and the total number of burned calories.
•	The users seem consistent with their total steps scores throughout the week. The most active day is Saturday, and the least active is Sunday.
•	The users start their day between 6 am and 8 am. They are most active between 5 pm and 7 pm and become less active at 8 pm.
•	The highest number of burned calories occurs between 5 pm and 7 pm when the users are most active.
•	Although the average user is very active for over 30 minutes daily, they still spend 81% of their time sedentary.
•	There is a strong, positive relationship between the total number of minutes asleep and the total time spent in bed, with users only spending an average of 39.5 minutes in bed being awake.
•	The users have a consistent sleeping schedule, with an average sleeping time of 419.8 minutes (or 7 hours) per night — with Sunday (7.6 hours) being when the users seem to have slept the most.
•	Recording the lowest number of steps and the highest number of minutes asleep, the users likely choose Sunday as a rest day.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations were carefully created to help guide Bellabeat's marketing strategy:
•	Personalized Notifications to Promote Activity: The users' average total steps is 7,638 — a mark well below the 10,000 daily steps recommended by the CDC. In addition, our analysis has shown that the average user spent about 81% of their day sedentary. Bellabeat could incorporate personalized notifications on its app to motivate users to keep moving throughout the day. Such messages could include real-time information regarding the number of steps taken so far or even the number of steps left to reach the daily goal.
•	Dynamic Calorie Counter: The app could also provide the user with an elegantly designed, easy-to-use interface that displays the number of calories burned throughout the day to improve motivation. The user could also have the option to set their customized daily calorie goal and be able to follow their progress throughout the day.
•	Detailed Sleeping Log: The average user has a consistent sleeping schedule, but those who may want to improve the quality of their sleep — or keep track of it — could benefit from a sleeping log. The app could offer this feature and record sleep quality, the number of times one wakes up during the night, the total amount of awake time in bed, anxiety, and/or stress levels.
•	Weekly and Monthly Achievement Reports: To keep the users motivated, the Bellabeat app could provide customized weekly and monthly reports regarding the total number of steps, burned calories, sleeping habits, weight loss, and total time spent on the different activity levels. The app could send congratulatory messages to those who keep up with good habits and motivational tips for improvement depending on the user's overall performance.
•	Meditation and Relaxation Services: The Bellabeat app could also offer meditation and relaxation tips and services —free or premium — to those looking to improve their sleep quality and/or reduce stress and anxiety levels. By tracking the time of day when the user decreases their activity levels, rest days, or perhaps around bedtime, the app could send notifications to the person's phone or a smart device and suggest different meditation or relaxation techniques.
•	Discounts on Other Bellabeat Wellness Products and Services: Another way to motivate customers is to offer special deals on the different Bellabeat products and their premium membership. This way, the users could become more inclined to get more active and purchase more products from the company.
